---
layout: post
title: Interest and Analysis
---

In [Episode 50 of "Not So Standard Deviations"](http://nssdeviations.com/50-existential-crisis-narrowly-averted), Hilary Parker talks about the importance of genuine interest in the product and business process being analyzed.  Hilary provides an interesting example where her team was investigating why more users were entering incorrect passwords in using the "Show Password" option, then only to find out that it was due to the auto-correct feature turned on while passwords are shown.  Hilary speculates that this problem could have been more easily identified if her team had better understanding of the company's website and its behaviors.  Based on this example, she further speculates what she calls "product intuition" can make the analysis more effective and productive by enabling the analyst to quickly generate "right" hypotheses that get to the core of the problem.

This speculation deeply resonates with my own experience.  Analyzing data from an unfamiliar educational system (i.e. Chicago Public Schools), I used to produce findings that are rather obvious to the practitioners in the field (e.g., principals).  Of course, it is always nice to have what we know backed up by empirical data, yet we should ask if this confirmation is central to our investigation as time and resources are limited.  My analysis is now being guided by "smarter" (i.e. more informed) hypotheses as I have gained more contextual knowledge on public education in Chicago.  Yet, I still experience situations where practitioners and field experts read more stories and signals from analysis results that I bring.  Although this is inevitable to some extent (data analyst cannot be an expert in every data she analyzes), it still demonstrates that genuine interest and knowledge in the subject are essential to effective and productive analysis.

These considerations then suggest that a data analyst should know what she is truly intrigued by.  When the analyst identifies and works on data of her genuine interest, she will naturally want to know more about the subject; and with increased contextual knowledge, she will more likely ask good questions and discern subtle signals and patterns that would have been missed without the nuanced understanding.
